[BREATHING]
NARRATOR: "At the
point of death,
the soul has the same
experience as those
who are being initiated
into the great mysteries.
At first, it wanders and
wearily hurries to and fro
and journeys with suspicion
through the dark like a person
who is uninitiated.
Then come all the terrors
before the final initiation,
shuddering, trembling,
sweating, amazement.
Then one is struck
with a marvelous light.
One is received into
pure regions and meadows
with voices and dancers and
the majesty of holy sounds
and shapes.
Among these, he who has
fulfilled initiation wanders
free and released and
bearing his crown,
joins in the divine
communion and consorts
with pure and holy men."
The quote is by a
philosopher describing
his initiation experience of the
Otherworld while still alive.
Such individuals would describe
this "risen from the dead,"
but the phrase is not
what it seems, nor has
it anything to do with zombies.
The Greek philosopher
Plato himself once
remarked how living
resurrection is the greatest
spiritual journey a person
can hope to experience
in their lifetime.
Even the apostles Phillip
wrote, in his suppressed gospel,
that living resurrection
is something everyone
should experience while alive.
All this may seem a little
odd, even unnerving to us
the 21st century.
But back in the day,
it was all the rage
for the few individuals
fortunate enough
to be admitted into
the mysteries teachings
and reach the highest
grade of initiation.
To reach this state,
one must first visit
a place called the Otherworld.
And the locations where
this is made possible
are all around us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[WIND BLOWING]
To any one raised to
the religious traditions
of the West,
resurrection means one
thing-- a miraculous achievement
by a man called Jesus.
But back then, people were
aware of a different version
of events.
The Gnostics of Greece,
Asia Minor, and Egypt
believed this man
never reincarnated
from a physical death.
Early Christian bishops
and philosophers
even maintained
that the crucifixion
was a fraud, that a substitution
named Simon of Cyrene
took Jesus' place.
A manuscript discovered
near the Dead Sea
called "Second Treatise
of the Great Seth"
and written less than a century
after the event is particularly
damning because it quotes
Jesus in the first person
describing his crucifixion.
"I did not die in reality,
but in appearance,
lest I be put to shame by them.
For my death, which
they think happened,
happened to them in
their error and blindness
since they nailed
their men unto death.
It was another, their father,
who drank the vinegar.
It was not I. It was
another, Simon, who
bore the cross on his shoulder.
It was another upon whom they
placed a crown of thorns.
And I was laughing
at their ignorance."
Most damning of all
is the admission
by the debauched pope, Leo
X, that the story of Jesus
was a myth in what must rank as
one of history's biggest gaffs.
Nevertheless, a literal
view of the Resurrection
was leveraged by
the Catholic church
with the help of
Emperor Constantine, who
for much of his life had
worshipped an ancient god-man
called Mithra who
was born of a virgin,
escaped death in
infancy, was crucified
on the winter solstice, and
resurrected three days later.
But Mithra was not the
only one of his kind.
At least 18 other god-men
are known around the world
answering to the same
description and they precede
Jesus by as much as 3,000
years, like the god-man savior
of Mesoamerica, Quetzcoatl,
born of a virgin,
indulged in 40 days' fast on
a sacred mountain, atoned,
rode an ass, was purified
in the temple with
water and anointed with oil.
Then he was nailed to a
cross on a sacred hill
and crossed into the
other world for three days
before resurrecting.
And not forgetting the Hindu
god-man of 1800 BC, Krishna.
Born in a cave and saved
from death in infancy,
he grows up to teach
a new religion,
then removes himself
to a wilderness
for a prescribed period,
returns, is killed and fixed
to a tree only to
resurrect three days later,
and thereafter deified as a god.
There are no less
than 346 analogies
between the life story of
Krishna and that of Jesus.
So what is resurrection
really about?
In his suppressed gospel,
the apostle Philip
gives us a big clue.
"Those who say they will
die first and then rise
are in error.
If they do not first receive the
resurrection while they live,
when they die, they
will receive nothing."
In other words,
those who believe
in the literal interpretation
of resurrection
are confusing a spiritual
truth with an actual event.
So if the concept of
resurrection that's been handed
to us is wrong,
what is the truth
and why is it necessary to
travel to the Otherworld
and back before one is
deemed risen from the dead?
[STATIC]
The Valley of the
Kings is filled
from end to end with tombs.
One, however, is out of place.
It belongs to the
pharaoh Tuthmosis III.
It features a well, a redundant
feature for a dead person.
Its oval sarcophagus is of
superlative craftsmanship,
and yet Tuthmosis' mummy
was buried here, a mile away
in the temple of Hatsheput where
the pharaoh had already built
himself a mortuary temple.
So why should one
man need two tombs?
The clue is written
on the walls of his
anomalous underground chamber.
It's a text called "Treatise
of the Hidden Chamber."
It provides instruction
on how to proceed
to the Otherworld, a place
as real to the Egyptians
as the physical world.
However, unlike
the physical world,
this parallel place
exists outside of time.
It is present and eternal and
simultaneous with the physical.
The Egyptians called it Amduat.
The Amduat interpenetrates
the world of the living.
It is the place from where
all physical forms manifest
and to where they return.
It is an integral component
of birth, death, and rebirth.
Only through a direct
experience of the Amduat
can a person fully grasp the
operative forces of nature,
the knowledge of which
was said to transform
a person into a
being radiant with
inner spiritual illumination.
All these instructions cover
the chambers of Tuthmosis'
alleged resting place.
But there's one problem.
That text claims
that the experience
is meant for a living person.
"It is good for the dead
to have this knowledge,
but also for the
person on Earth.
Whoever understands
these mysterious images
is a well provided light being.
Always, this person can enter
and leave the other world,
always speaking to the
living ones, proven
to be true a million times."
It's worth pointing out
that the name Tuthmosis
means "Djehuti is born."
Djehuti is the god
of knowledge and one
of the two principal gods
of the resurrection texts
who guard the gate
into the other world.
It was said that Djehuti
knew the secrets of the night
and could initiate them
to the living by the use
of correct techniques
so they might visit
the Otherworld and return.
His teachings
describe how this can
be achieved while still alive.
"The human being can
become established on high
without ever leaving the earth."
There are many identical
cases of burial chambers
with absent burials
throughout Egypt.
Perhaps the best
known is this one.
According to
orthodox archaeology,
the Great Pyramid is a
tomb of Pharaoh Khufu.
And yet in 500 BC, even the
Greek historian Herodotus
stated how this
pharaoh built himself
a subterranean burial
chamber on the hill of Giza
where the pyramids stand.
Clearly, Khufu was not
buried in this building,
nor is there evidence it
was ever used as a tomb.
But people who've
spend time reflecting
inside its main chamber,
including scientists,
recall seeing unusually
tall people dressed
in a kind of silk emerging
from the walls like figures
from another dimension.
Those who've meditated inside
the granite box describe
travelling to other realities
as though in a shamanic journey.
Perhaps the Great
Pyramid's real name offers
a clue behind its real purpose.
In ancient times,
it was referred
to as the House of Osiris
after the Egyptian god
of resurrection.
In the myth, Osiris is placed
inside a box and dismembered,
his body carried down the
river, then reassembled
by his consort Isis, the
divine virgin, whereupon Osiris
resurrects as a new being.
He has effectively
risen from the dead.
Like so many myths, it is a
vessel for a spiritual truth.
In this case, it
perfectly describes
the journey of the initiate who
crosses into the Otherworld.
In this voluntary
near death experience,
the candidate's
preconceived notions of life
must first be
shattered if they are
to successfully cross a kind
of river into the afterlife.
It is there that
the soul comes face
to face with the creative
forces of the universe.
In the language of
the temple, this
was referred to as
a sacred marriage
with the divine virgin.
Once the individual is made
aware of the great mystery
of life, he or she
is reassembled,
in a matter of speaking, and the
soul returns to the living body
more awake than ever before.
Such initiations were
conducted in secret chambers
inside the temples.
Successful candidates were
declared risen from the dead
because this eye-opening
journey had made them feel
as though, for the first time,
they really were alive compared
to ordinary people who went
about life as though asleep
and unaware of the
true nature of things.
They were called the dead.
[STATIC]
It is interesting that
the interior passages
of the Great Pyramid so resemble
the diagrams of the Otherworld.
The journey begins in a
subterranean room made
of rough stone, continues
along an ascending passage,
and concludes in the
initiation chamber
where the stone is
polished, a perfect metaphor
of the initiate who
progresses from a rough form
to a polished diamond.
These are just a few
examples that not all temples
were built for
funerary purposes,
but instead served
a ritual function.
As the Egyptians
themselves declared,
a tomb may be a place of
rest, but not necessarily
a person's final resting place.
In the temple of Abydos, there's
a chapel dedicated exclusively
to Osiris, the god-man
who returns transformed
from the Otherworld.
He is the example for
other immortals to follow.
Beneath lies one of the most
formidable underground chambers
ever built, the Osireion,
made from cyclopean
blocks of red granite.
Judging from the buildup of
mud around its perimeter,
it is believed to be at
least 12,000 years old.
The name speaks for itself.
It is a House of Osiris, leaving
little doubt that the mystery
play of his rebirth was taught
and performed here in what was
essentially an artificial cave.
For centuries, the
only surviving source
of information on the rites
and the mysteries conducted
at sites such as this came
from the second century writer
Lucius Apuleius based on his
personal initiation experience.
Lucius describes how
he underwent a period
of observation within the
temple where the priests taught
him asceticism and how
to purge base emotions
from the physical body, followed
by a 10-day fast in preparation
for the final stage.
Then at sunset on the
final day, Apuleius
writes, "The high priest
ordered all uninitiated persons
to depart, invested in
me a new linen garment,
and led me by the hand into the
inner recesses of the sanctuary
itself.
I approached the
very gates of death
and set one foot on
Persephone's threshold.
I journeyed through
all the elements
and yet was permitted to return.
At midnight, I saw the sun
shining as if it were noon.
I entered the presence of
the gods of the Otherworld,
stood near, and worshiped them."
Apuleius describes the benefit
of his experiences being,
"In a certain sense,
reborn and brought back
on the road of a new blessing."
Egyptian texts add that the
priest or initiate would
go into a restricted
room and enter
a state of meditation
which paved the way
for access into the Otherworld.
The priests expected
every person
to return, albeit sometimes
stunned by what they'd seen.
Yet again at Abydos,
there is no burial.
The pharaoh associated
with this temple, Seti I,
was buried precisely
52 miles away
in the Valley of the Kings.
But virtually
equidistant to Abydos
lies another chapel dedicated
to Osiris, this time at Edfu.
It's as though the planners were
using a numerological reference
to places of the Otherworld
because 52 also happens
to be the angle of the
slope of that other House
of Osiris, the Great Pyramid.
It is also the angle
of the heptagon
which esoteric
teachings describe
as the geometry of the soul.
Edfu is dedicated to the
falcon god Horus, the image
of the resurrected Osiris.
In this temple, restricted
knowledge concerning initiation
called "raising" was transmitted
in secret to a select few.
This essential instruction,
allowing access
to the Otherworld, was conducted
in two underground chambers
accessed through passages hidden
within Edfu's hollow walls.
The same ritual was reenacted
500 years later in Jerusalem
by Jesus and the Essenes.
What initiates saw and
learned in the Otherworld
was not to be shared.
And in case they forgot, an
injunction carved on the temple
wall was there to remind them.
It reads, "Do not reveal what
you have seen in the mysteries
of the temple."
An identical chamber exists
in the temple of Dendera.
Accessed through a
hole in the floor,
the claustrophobic
passageway leads
to narrow chambers officially
described as storage rooms.
So why the walls
should be covered
with these elaborate
ritual scenes
is illogical, to say the least.
But the rooms are ideal for a
person undergoing incubation
while the murals depict one
of a kind reliefs and symbols
of what can only be
described as instructions
of a regeneration ritual.
One place that is synonymous
with transformation
is Saqqara, a sprawling
ceremonial temple
complex named for Seker,
the falcon god of rebirth.
The name comes from "sekre"
meaning, "hurry to me,"
the cry made by Isis to
guide the soul of Osiris
as it travels through the
darkness towards the Otherworld
to unite with his
celestial bride.
In Saqqara, one finds
the earliest surviving
sacred literature offering a
unique window into the ritual
connecting a living person with
the Otherworld, the Pyramid
Texts.
Covering the walls of
the hidden chambers
beneath the pyramid
of the Pharaoh Unas,
the four and a half
thousand year old
Pyramid Texts contain the
most detailed instructions
of the Otherworld, how to
get there, how to overcome
negative forces at the start,
and the correct use of spells
and incantations essential
for the soul to maintain
focus throughout the journey.
They also imply
they were intended
as a ritual where the
initiate was expected
to return to the living body.
Once again, this necropolis
contains no evidence of Unas'
burial, just an
empty black granite
sarcophagus lying purposefully
in the west section
of the complex, the symbolic
direction of the Otherworld.
The Pyramid Texts represent a
series of mystical experiences
akin to those
described in shamanism,
but the unusual theme that
defines the Pyramid Texts
as an instruction meant for
a living person undergoing
a figurative rather
than literal death
is found beside the sarcophagus.
"O, Unas, you have
not departed dead.
You have departed alive to
sit upon the throne of Osiris
so that you may give
orders to the living."
The message is clear.
The pharaoh has ascended into
the Otherworld very much alive.
And by following in the
footsteps of Osiris,
he is able to communicate with
the living and the discarnate
alike.
A second clue that
the texts were
used as a tool for the
living is a description
of Unas undergoing a spiritual
purification to the repeated
chorus of, "Unas is not dead.
Unas is not dead," preceded
by the rebirth of his spirit
back into his living body.
No other utterance so
encapsulates the central theme
common to all
mysteries traditions,
that the soul is capable
of temporarily disengaging
from the living body, journeying
independently into the spirit
world, and returning.
The point of the
Pyramid Texts was
to expose the soul of
the living to the wonders
of the Otherworld and return
it to the body with knowledge
of celestial
mechanics so that they
might be applied in daily life.
This is how the divine flows
through the conscious self
while a person performs
the earthly duties.
It forms a central tenet
of esoteric thought.
But above all, it's
an experience designed
for the living, not to
be left undiscovered
until the moment one exhales
their last breath on Earth.
[RAIN]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In the world of the Celts,
there exist many traditions
of doorways into the
Otherworld, a number of which
are identified with
the ancient world
"sacra," which means
"illuminated being"
and "paradise."
At the core of the Otherworld
tradition in Scotland
is a pyramidal mountain
called Schiehallion meaning,
"the Hill of the Fairy Realm."
2/3 of the way up lies a hidden
chamber the Celts peopled
with supernatural
beings, its folklore
committed to paper by the local
19th century parish priest.
"There is a very remarkable
cave near the southwest
angle of Schiehallion
a cave of the giant.
Some miles to the east,
there is an opening
in the face of a rock
which is believed
to be the termination thereof.
Several stories told and
believed by the credulous
relating to this cave,
that the inside thereof
is full of chambers
or separate apartments
and that as soon as a
person advances a few yards,
he comes to a door which,
the moment he enters,
closes as it opened,
of its own accord,
and prevents his returning."
The only people known to have
frequented this abode of fairy
folk were those initiated
into the secrets of nature,
a tradition traced back to a
group of hermit monks named
the Caldee, a branch of the
spiritual bloodline descending
from the Essenes and other
gnostics, all of whom
share the same
tradition of initiation
and living resurrection.
Like the Egyptians, the
Celts consider the Otherworld
to be a location
whose time and space
differs from the
physical world, and yet
utterly intertwines
with it, just occupying
a different dimension.
One of the lords that
governed the Celtic Otherworld
is Nectan.
There is a sacred cave dedicated
to him in a secluded valley
in Cornwall.
It is located at
the crossing of two
of the Earth's energy currents.
Until the fifth century,
druids would live here
in splendid isolation,
seeking an experience
of the Otherworld.
Their quests would
often last years.
Latter day pilgrims
still journey here hoping
to reach more distant horizons.
Sometimes they carve their
meditations and wishes
in the stone.
Further along the valley, there
is another energy hot spot
marked by an ancient labyrinth,
the symbol of the opposing
forces of dark and
light that must
be reconciled before
the pilgrim can
venture into the Otherworld.
Some people are known
to stay here overnight
to try it for themselves.
In Welsh mythology,
the Otherworld
is called Annwfn, also
known as [INAUDIBLE],
"The castle of the fairies."
Much like the Egyptian Amduat,
it is described as a world
of essential delights.
Entry into this
garden of enchantment
is possible through a shamanic
initiation while living.
And to facilitate it, the Celts
built countless structures,
many with dark inner
chambers covered with earth,
resembling man-made caves,
the most common types
being the passage
mound and the dolmen.
The practice was so pervasive
that dolmens are found
from Ireland to North
Africa and across Asia,
with the Korean
peninsula boasting
the greatest concentration
anywhere in the world.
Regardless of where these
enigmatic structures appear,
they are united by one element.
They all occur along the
crossing points of the Earth's
electromagnetic currents.
No wonder the Celts
regarded them as places
set aside from the normal
world as though separated
by a force field.
Each site is guarded by
beings said to continue
living in spirit form.
On occasion, they present
themselves to the living
when they meditate at sacred
places such as the stone circle
at Uragh, nestled high on a
mountain overlooking a lake
and framed by waterfalls, where
the apparition of an extremely
tall woman clad in
a kind of light silk
appears to visitors who travel
here on spiritual quests.
It is one of many places where
contact with the Otherworld
can be experienced.
In central Ireland, the
place for connecting
with the Otherworld
is Schlieb Mikili
Beara, also known as Lockgrew.
The hill is named for
the central goddess
of the Celtic creation myth
whose depiction in blue-green
makes her the equivalent of
those other gods of living
resurrection, Shiva and Osiris.
One of Schlieb Mikili
Beara's 300 impressive mounds
is a chamber filled with carved
stones immediately identifying
it as a room once used for
visualization and out of body
journeying.
The chamber receives
its direct sunlight
on two occasions, the sunrise
marking Sawan, the day when
the veil with the Otherworld
is thinnest, and sunrise
at Imbolc, the day dedicated
to the goddess Brigid,
a triple goddess of knowledge,
the arts, and illumination.
As such, she is the
counterpart of Djehuti,
the Egyptian deity who
presides at the threshold
into the Otherworld.
Brigid's Celtic name is Bride,
the root of the word "bride,"
and it's not by accident
that the rooms used
specifically for
reaching the Otherworld
are called bridal chambers.
This particular bridal chamber
is now an island, since cut off
from the land by rising
seas, demonstrating
just how ancient these places
and practices really are.
Another lies on the remote
Scottish island of Lewis.
The stone circle of
Callanish is unique
insofar as it is
connected by four
avenues of glistening
gneiss, each
aligned to the cardinal points.
except one, which
faces the northeast,
the direction associated
with illumination
and ancient wisdom,
the very benefits
of traveling to the Otherworld.
This detail gives away one
of its original functions,
for although there is no
doubt Callanish references
significant astronomical
events, there once
existed a superfluous beehive
shaped cairn in the center
featuring an underground
chamber facing east,
the direction associated
with resurrection.
There was no trace of burial.
However, the anomalous
avenue of stones
once extended a mile further
to a second underground chamber
which also faces east.
It appears that Callanish
served a ritual purpose where
a person prepared at one site,
walked the ceremonial route
to be initiated inside the
cave-like bridal chamber
in the center of the circle.
This scenario would be familiar
to someone visiting from Egypt,
especially Saqqara,
where the very same
journey was taken by
candidates preparing
to enter the Otherworld.
When entering these
temples, there
is a distinct feeling of
crossing into another reality.
The Celts regarded the
Otherworld as a place separated
from the normal world as
though by a forcefield,
and they defined it
symbolically as an island
in the west, an overseas
paradise of nature spirits
where the ancestors live
immortally in a state of bliss
and into which mortals
can be admitted,
having gained the trust of
the guardian of the temple
and given the proper training.
But most importantly, mortals
allowed into the spirit
realm did so while still alive.
This island is the
same westerly realm
to where Egyptian initiates
embarked during their journey
into the Otherworld.
It is the kingdom the dying sun
descends into during the night,
the shadow world.
And both cultures
believed it was situated
not in some unknown
distant territory,
but beside the physical
world, merely whisper
away in another dimension.
One such island lives off
the west coast of England.
For over 2,000 years, Tintagel
has been a place where people
prepare to embark
on a journey even
more endless than
the visible horizon.
A cave runs through the
entire length, dedicated
to the magician Merlin.
Here, initiates
entered the Otherworld
from the west, immersed
themselves in total darkness
to confront their
greatest fears,
and emerged reborn in the east.
It even sits on
magnetic anomaly,
giving the palpable
aura of a place set
aside from the normal world.
Up to the fifth
century, Tintagel island
drew people from as far
as the Mediterranean,
searching for spiritual renewal.
The clue to unlocking
its secret lies across
on the mainland, a rare
church dedicated to Mater
Anne, the mother of the gods.
Beside it lies an ancient
mound beneath which
was discovered a large polygonal
chamber aligned east-west.
It contained a cache
of valuable goods
from southeast
Turkey, but no body.
How odd that tomb robbers
should choose necrophilia
over the precious items.
There is also an unusual stone
used for aligning the Great
Bear and the pole star that
rises above Tintagel island
when the sun is reborn
on the winter solstice.
According to indigenous
traditions around the world,
souls incarnate
from the pole star
and travel along an invisible
tube to and from the Earth.
This tradition is remembered
in a local folktale that claims
Tintagel is the site
of a fairy castle
whose gate appears twice
a year, on each solstice.
But Tintagel's most famous
association with the Otherworld
is the myth of King
Arthur and the grail.
It is an adaptation of the
Egyptian Resurrection myth
with Arthur playing
the role of Osiris,
his evil brother Mordred
as Set, and Merlin
as Djehuti, the god of wisdom.
It is also a reworking
of earlier Celtic legends
about a hero's journey of
self discovery whereupon
he weds a divine virgin.
Arthur is a composition
fifth century
king, part real, part myth.
It may not even have
been a real name,
but a title, given
that "arth fawr"
is Welsh for "Great Bear,"
the constellation bearing
the pole star in his time.
Like other resurrected
god-men, Arthur's birth
to a virgin queen is
magically conceived.
He marries a beautiful
maiden whose dowry brings him
to a round table while his
12 battles are analogies
of the stages of initiation
into the mysteries
as well as the passage of
the sun through the houses
of the zodiac.
Essentially, the story portrays
the cycle of life and rebirth,
least of all because it is
rich in allegorical references
of transcending ordinary
consciousness through a journey
into a mystical land.
The experience is
what empowers the hero
to overcome the obstacles
of the physical world.
[WAVES CRASHING]
On the summit of Tintagel
is Arthur's footprint,
carved into the living stone.
It marks the ritual site
for resurrecting the power
of the ruler at moment the
sun rises above the horizon
on December the 21st.
It also marks the path of
an Earth energy currency
and forms an alignment with the
church and the winter solstice
sunrise.
An identical mark exists
on the sacred hill
of Dunadd in Scotland
where divine kingship
was similarly consecrated.
It too marks the winter
solstice sunrise.
A few yards from
Arthur's footprint
is a ritual chamber that
once held a baptismal pool
at its western entrance.
The tunnel has been
hand-cut in the shape
of an S for no practical reason,
until it was discovered that it
matches the path of the
same energy current flowing
through Arthur's footprint.
Like other bridal
chambers, the candidate
enters in the west at
the equinox sunset,
becomes immersed in the
womb of the Otherworld,
and emerges into the light
at the sunrise, triumphantly
risen and returned
with his eyes open
back into the physical world.
[BEES BUZZING]
The places of access
into the Otherworld
share a long association
with the bee.
Since the bee and the honeycomb
effortlessly characterize
the manifestation of
divine harmony in nature,
these were considered the link
between life and afterlife.
Nature gods such as
Vishnu, Pan, and Aphrodite
are depicted as
honeybees on a flower
while the Egyptian sun god
Ra cries tears of honey
which transform into
honeybees the moment
they touch the earth.
Even priestesses who
assisted candidates
undergoing initiation
were nicknamed "bees."
The fact notwithstanding that
bees hibernate for three months
before reemerging,
such attributes
explain why chambers used
to access the Otherworld
were often designed in
the shape of a beehive.
But on occasion,
the honeycomb also
appears in temples
and in doing so,
reveals their
purpose, particularly
on the island of Malta.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Malta's cyclopean
temple architecture
appeared out of nowhere
and completely developed
without precedence by 3,200
BC on an island with too small
a footprint to
have sustained such
an architectural civilization.
With womb-like designs
originally capped
with beehive domes,
nothing looks like them.
Malta's oldest
temple is Ggantija,
the Tower of the Giants, one
of the oldest freestanding
structures in the world,
erected apparently by people
with no accumulated
knowledge of building
sophisticated structures.
Folklore claims it was
built by a giantess
by the name of Sansuna, whose
ability to carry large stones
was attributed to
her vegetarian diet.
The story is an echo of the
earliest cult of Demeter,
goddess of grain,
who was associated
with a hallucinogenic
narcotic drunk by initiates
during the final stage
of initiation prior
to entering the Otherworld.
Malta's most
impressive temple is
Mnajdra, situated
high on the cliff
overlooking the Mediterranean.
Its architects left no written
record of what took place here,
not uncommon given the
secrecy with which they
protected valuable information.
But a glance at the unique way
the stones have been decorated
gives the game away.
They are covered in
small holes, giving
the temple the appearance
of a massive honeycomb.
[BEES BUZZING]
Many of Malta's temples,
such as Tarxien,
feature adjoining
underground chambers.
The purpose of these chambers
was unknown until 1902
when workers accidentally broke
through the ceiling of a well
preserved subterranean
ritual complex that
became known as the
Hypogeum of Hal Saflieni.
The limestone bedrock has been
hollowed into 33 contiguous
holes and chambers
on three floors
with a footprint of a
quarter of a square mile.
It's an ideal sensory
environment for entering
a subtler level of reality.
The clue appears on the ceiling
of its most resonant chamber
which is painted into
interlocking hexagons,
a reminder that one is
standing inside a honeycomb.
The recent research shows how
the chambers of the hypogeum
were designed to induce
hallucinatory effects.
They feature a resonant
frequency of 112 hertz.
This frequency
shifts the activity
over the prefrontal
cortex of the brain,
resulting in a deactivation
of the language center
and a shift towards
visualization.
So by design, these
chambers are switching
on an area of the brain that
induces an altered state
of consciousness.
Malta's hypogeum is not
alone in this respect.
Experiments into the
acoustic behavior
inside ancient megalithic sites
such as Ireland's Newgrange
and England's Shan Coit
and Wayland's Smithy
show the same
resonant frequency is
present inside these chambers.
There is one further
piece of evidence
that Malta's temples served
as a place of pilgrimage
for initiates seeking
the ultimate ride
of their lives, an
experience of the Otherworld.
It lies in Homer's Greek
classic, "The Odyssey."
Even by Homer's
time, no initiate
was allowed to
discuss what he or she
had seen in the Otherworld.
Such an indiscretion
was punishable by law.
However, that did not
prevent initiates like Homer
from working the information
into fictional prose.
Although his epic is set in
the mythical islands of Ogygia,
Malta is said to have
served as his inspiration.
The name means
"primeval," referring
to the mythical island
in the west so prevalent
in Otherworld myths, a place
apart from the hero's own time
and space, much like
the location one
travels to in an altered state.
This island is the residence
of Calypso, a nymph whose
siren call lures
Odysseus to her,
just as Isis once
called to Osiris.
Her unusual name
means "concealment
of subtle knowledge," the
type of specialist information
to be found in the Otherworld
and the kind of information
Odysseus learns when he
joins his divine bride, which
of course makes him immortal.
Homer's epic is describing
the initiate's immersion
into the mysteries whereby he
undertakes a perilous journey
and returns with his eyes open.
Given how Homer was
himself an initiate,
he was merely retelling
his own experience
in a matter in which
he did not betray
the secrets of the mysteries,
precisely as Plato remarked.
Homer's hymn to Demeter
praises the bliss of initiates
in the Otherworld and pitied
those who die without having
ever been initiated.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[BIRDS CHIRPING]
Just as in the
northern hemisphere
the Celts attached great
importance to the pole star,
so the people of the Andes
considered the constellation
of the Southern Cross
in the Milky Way
to be the entrance into the
Otherworld in the south.
And likewise, its gates
open on the four days
around the winter solstice.
The Andean journey
to the Otherworld
was epitomized by the river
flowing along the sacred valley
between Cuzco and Machu Picchu.
The valley was the
reflection of the sky
and the river, the terrestrial
counterpart of the Milky Way.
And just as the Egyptian's
saw the Nile in the same way
and performed the passion
play of Isis and Osiris
in its riverside
temples, so the Aymara
conducted pilgrimage between
Cuzco and Machu Picchu
amid precisely built megalithic
temples of great antiquity.
Upon reaching Machu
Picchu, initiates
would find there a special
room carved out of living rock.
It is directly lit by the
winter solstice sunrise.
Inside, two doors
offer a choice.
Those who chose the left door
found their progress impeded.
Only those who
choose the right door
were led to a
secret chamber where
the final ritual was conducted.
This simple teaching
illustrated the limitation
of using logical left
brain thinking to access
the Otherworld and its wisdom.
Only the intuitive right
brain will get you there.
This esoteric belief was still
being taught by the philosopher
Zeno at his mystery school
in Greece thousands of years
later.
Machu Picchu was by no
means the only place
for entering the
Otherworld At Sillustani
stand these unusual
towers called chulpas.
The massive curved
stones are so well
fitted than an
alpaca hair cannot
be inserted between them.
Later towers are fitted to
a similar high standard,
but finished in
more linear fashion
as though by a cosmic draftsman.
The structures are described
as Uta Amaya, "houses
of the soul," not
"for the soul,"
indicating they may
originally have been used
for ritual rather than burial.
One 16th century historian
suspected the towers were later
reused for burial
during Inca times,
but originally served
a ritual purpose.
He may be right.
When one of the towers
partially collapsed,
it revealed how the core
masonry was designed
in the shape of a beehive.
Also, they are only accessible
through a tiny rectangular
doorway, forcing even
the smallest of people
to scramble on all
fours as though made
to enter the
structure in a state
of humility, one of
the prerequisites
for entering the Otherworld.
And just like temples
used for similar purposes,
every entrance on every chulpa
is oriented precisely east.
More structures
appear at Kutimbo.
If you happen to be
standing by the main tower
when the sun is at its zenith,
something wondrous occurs.
The light reveals
relief carvings
above the doorway of what
appears to be a male and female
figure, the symbolic
coupling of the initiate
with his celestial bride.
There also come into view the
reliefs of two large dogs,
which at first seems an
unusual choice of creature
to carve at the entrance
to a ritual chamber,
but not to the Aymara, who
taught that a soul experiencing
living resurrection undergoes
an ordeal as it winds
its way to the Otherworld.
The Andean account of
this afterlife journey
uses the symbol of a bridge
across a raging river.
And as a soul crosses the river,
it is assisted by black dogs
capable of seeing in the dark.
The story find its
parallel in the hounds
of Hades of the
Greek mystery schools
and Anubis, the guide of the
soul in the Egyptian temple.
Throughout the
ancient city of Cuzco,
there are reminders
that it was once
a megalithic site
built to standards far
beyond our modern technology.
"Cuzco" means "navel
of the Earth,"
and the title defines
its importance
in the ancient world.
High above the hills
that cradle Cuzco lies
an impressive megalithic
site spread across 50 acres
called Sacsayhuaman.
It means "place of
the satisfied falcon."
Before the Spanish conquistadors
destroyed much of it
for building material,
it featured a second wall
that from the air gave this
sacred site the impression
of a pair of wings.
Since the falcon is a reference
to the Egyptian god Khepri,
the very symbol of rebirth,
it identifies the temple
as a place where one
would come to be reborn,
although how the Egyptian
connection came to be here
is still a mystery.
Secret tunnels still attest to
Sacsayhuaman's ritual function
and connection with
underground caves.
But the atmosphere
of Sacsayhuaman
is transcended by that
of a small temple a mile
to the east, an eroded limestone
mound carved inside and out
with ledges, passageways,
stairs that lead nowhere,
and the ritual cave.
It's Quechuan name is Q'inqu
meaning "zigzag," the pattern
carved above the chamber.
This archetypal design
appears throughout the world
in sacred places where the
earth's energy pathways flow
and where people conducted
out of body journeys.
Q'inqu was locally
described as the entrance
into the Otherworld and its
underground chamber is accessed
by a passage that,
just like in Tintagel,
was deliberately carved
out of solid rock to face
west, the direction of ritual
descent into the Otherworld.
Inside, the chamber
meanders like an S,
the limestone skillfully
sculpted into a series
of polished ledges
where one could
spend a very comfortable
night immersed
in a womb-like setting.
The chamber exits
to the east and
into a bowl-shaped courtyard
that holds the equinox sunrise.
A nine hour bus ride
through the Andes
brings you to a sandstone massif
on the edge of Lake Titicaca.
Once, it was an island
resembling a teardrop.
The tectonic shifts
that plague this region
have tilted the bedrock
a full 90 degrees,
leaving the red stone
exposed to the elements.
The hill is called
Hayu Marca, literally,
"the gate of the spirits."
And long ago, nameless people
carved a monumental portal
and called it Amaru Muru.
The oldest legend describes
Amaru Muru as a doorway
to the lands of the
gods and how in times
long past, great heroes
passed through this gate
for a glorious new life of
immortality in the Otherworld.
The doorway faces the
rising equinox sun.
In the Quechuan language,
"amaru" means "serpent."
It identifies the site as a
conduit for the Earth's energy
currents, which together
with the high content of iron
in the rock leaves an
immediate impression
on anyone who comes here.
Local people often report
a blue light emanating
from a tunnel inside
the rock or people
dressed in unusual closing
emerging from this portal.
And yet Amaru Muru is an
identical concept to the spirit
doors found in
Egyptian chambers which
were carved so that the
soul may enter and leave
the Otherworld at will.
Amaru Muru has a twin on the
opposite side of the world
at Yazilikaya in Turkey.
The site has been incorrectly
identified as the resting place
of Midas, the fabled king who
turned everything he touched
into gold, although his
body was never found here,
nor is it likely to
be, because "Mida" is
the surname of the
goddess Cybele,
a local adaptation of
Demeter, the presiding
goddess of the Greek
mystery schools
and its ritual of
living resurrection.
And just like Amaru
Muru, a doorway
on the summit carved out
of the bedrock in the shape
of a beehive descends
900 feet into the chamber
where rituals into the
Otherworld were once conducted.
What happened to the people who
journeyed to the Otherworld?
What happened to the
knowledge they gained?
Did their ideas help
reshape society?
And what became of the
portals they once used?
Incredibly, despite
the persecution
by orthodox religion,
the mystical practices
of the mystery schools were
resurrected in the 12th century
by a devout group of monks.
In the westernmost
point of Europe
lies a mountain aligned
east-west where a people called
the Offusa once worshipped.
The name means "people
of the serpent."
In other words, they worked with
the Earth energy and its ways.
Here on the mountain of Sintra
they erected countless temples
to the lunar goddess
Sin, from whom
the mountain gets its name.
They were real sinners in
the true meaning of the word.
She is also known as Isis.
Two megalithic temples
stand at either end.
This one faces the Atlantic
Ocean and the setting sun
at the equinox.
It was once a doorway
into the Otherworld.
It is said that a tunnel
leads through the mountains
to the second temple
on the east side,
which faces the rising sun.
It was designed as
the ultimate test
for an initiate walking
in darkness like his soul
in the shadow world.
Since then, all kinds of
seekers have come here
to experience the Otherworld,
building solitary chambers
and caverns to escape the
turmoil and distraction
of the secular world.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
One hermit went on a
vision quest for 40 years
while living in
splendid isolation.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[SINGING]
Later, a group of monks
built their own hermitage
nearby out of natural
stone and found their way
to this inter-dimensional
paradise.
But one group of
monks in particular
not only came here all
the way from Jerusalem
to create this country
called Portugal,
they also resuscitated
the ancient tradition
of raising the
dead by rebuilding
the old sacred
places while adding
a few flourishes of their own.
These monks of the
Cistercian order
would eventually be known
as the Knights Templar.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
One of their main
places of veneration
was the mountain of
Monsanto, the sacred mount.
Here they practiced
their rituals
using false graves cut out of
living rock in which initiates
would lie in a near death
state while their soul
traveled to the Otherworld.
The graves appear on the
west slope of the mountain.
As they woke in the morning,
they would find themselves
in another grave in
the east on the summit
facing the rising sun.
Their baptismal
pool still exists.
The Templars were not
the first people here.
By their time, it was already
an ancient sacred site,
the center marked by
a boulder resembling
a cosmic egg upon which is
carved the symbol of a womb.
The Templars built a castle
around this ritual stone
and protected the site.
They were sensitive
to the tradition
because they shaped the
wall so that the first light
of the equinox sunrise falls
precisely on this rock.
But there's another
curious feature beneath it.
At first sight, what appears
to be a well is in fact
a ritual chamber where a
person could be immersed
in a womb-like environment.
The Templars' most mysterious
center of initiation
was back in Sintra
in a place once known
as the Forest of Angels, an
ancient sacred grove where
the mysteries were taught.
The property was bought at
the end of the 19th century
by a member of the Freemasons,
the progeny of the Templars,
who painstakingly
rebuilt the sides
and left symbols
throughout its landscape
to arouse interest of the
mysteries in future seekers.
There are statues of
gods, goddesses, symbols
dealing with secret teachings.
There is even an underground
river imitating the mythical
River Styx, the body of water
the soul of the initiate
must cross safely in order
to reach the other world.
But most mysterious of all
are the endless subterranean
passages once used by
initiates as they imitated
the path of the soul of Osiris
as he searched for his bride
through the darkness and towards
the light of the Otherworld.
There are even small
nooks where a person
can sit in deep
meditation, seeking
an inner experience of God.
There is no end of mystery here.
[FOOTSTEPS]
One tunnel leads to a kind
of well made of rough stones
as though replaying the
beginning of the journey
of initiation that once
began in the rough chamber
underneath the pyramid.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Other dark passages
take the soul
to a very different
place, a second shaft
around which wraps
a spiral staircase.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Just like the
superior architecture
beneath a canopy
of distant trees,
the initiate became
a polished stone.
Having gained a knowledge of the
gods whilst in the Otherworld,
he or she would then imitate
the path of the soul,
returning to the light of the
physical world, the wisdom
having opened their
eyes to the bigger
picture so much so that they
could now walk on water.
The Templars are known to
have followed and practiced
the secret mysteries
based on the principles
of the resurrection of Osiris.
And just as the
Egyptians built chambers
where no one was buried,
so too did the Templars.
Under the floor of their
most famous round building
in the town of Tomar, they hid
their most important ritual
chamber.
A secret tunnel connects
it to their church
at the bottom of the hill.
Above the tunnel, there is
a strange carving of a dog
and a lion on the church wall.
The dog represents Sirius,
the star of ancient wisdom
and the first shining light
the initiates in ancient times
would see after returning
from the Otherworld.
The lion represents Regulus,
the brightest star in Leo,
long associated with
the key to the mysteries
as well as the gateway to
the records of all knowledge.
The Templars were
making a point.
If a line is drawn
from the rotunda
through the two pillars
inside the church marked
with the symbols of the
dragon and the Green Man,
the pagan god who resurrects
on the winter solstice,
the line extends to this
basilica in Jerusalem,
one of the three main
sacred sites of the Templars
in that city.
Connecting these sites creates
a perfect isosceles triangle.
Bisect this trinity
and the line extends
to Egypt right into one of the
most famous houses of Osiris,
the Osireion at Abydos.
[SINGING]
It seems the knowledge of living
resurrection and the places
of the Otherworld that allow
it to happen are still alive
and all around us if we
care to open our eyes.
The wisdom of the
ancients reminds us
that the point of
experiencing the Otherworld
is to restore the soul to that
state of perfection in which it
entered the world,
but from whose aim
it becomes deflected whilst
in the physical body.
Better enabled, a
person may conduct him
or herself with greater
certainty while living.
The gnostic gospels describe
the benefit behind this pursuit
almost 2,000 years
ago, how there
are two antagonistic forces
at work in the world,
the god of light,
right action, and love,
and the god of darkness, whose
primary aim is to frustrate
the attainment of
such positive forces
by making people drink of
the waters of forgetfulness
in order that they might not
know the origin of their soul.
The purpose shared
by all esoteric sects
was to liberate humans
from this ensnarement
by initiating them into
the cult of knowledge.
And the technique was a shamanic
journey into the underworld.
Although our journey has dealt
with matters of ages long gone,
it's appeal is timely.
More and more people are
shunning major world religions
because their core has
been revealed to be hollow
or the message
hijacked by extremists.
People are rejecting
communal prayer
for personal
introspection, ironically
imitating the very essence of
the hermit's solitary search
for self discovery,
because as humans,
we long for spiritual
rejuvenation
and direct experience
of purpose.
The aim of the knowledge
gained from the experience
of the Otherworld was to
assist people transcend
their perceived
helplessness by making
them take an active role in
their conscious manifestation
process.
Because all forms all
interconnected in the material
and the ethereal
worlds, a person
armed with an understanding
of cosmic laws
can influence the
outcome of forces
taking place in both worlds.
They can become masters
of their own reality
rather than being victims of it.
Ultimately, the gift and goal
of reaching the Otherworld
is to discover the
freedom of conscience
precisely as the suppressed
gospel of Thomas reminds us.
"Whoever finds himself is
superior to the world."
[MUSIC PLAYING]